School of Business, Arts, Social Sciences and
Technology
MSc Data Science and Artificial
Intelligence Level: 7
Module: Introduction to Programming and Data Management
Assessment:
Module Tutor:
Weighting in Module:
Hand out:
Hand in:
Assessment: Database design and implementation
Anousheh Ramezani
50%
Monday 20th October 2025
on or before 5pm Friday November 14th 2025 via Brightspace
portal
Learning outcomes to be assessed:
• Demonstrate an effective understanding of the SQL language
• Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of database theory, techniques and
applications
• Understand how Python, SQL and relational databases can be integrated to form
effective programming solutions
What is required?
• A data model of a relational database in the form of an Entity-Relationship diagram
• The resulting database implemented in MySQL or Python (SQLite).
• 3,500-word reflective essay critically analysing the decisions made during the design and
implementation as well as documenting how the database can be queried.
Assessment Brief. See
the attached brief.

Assessment & Grading Criteria:
ASSESSMENT CRITERIA
• Evaluate the technical dimensions of database architectures and solutions
• Demonstrate knowledge and understanding of database theory, techniques and
applications as informed by research and practice at the forefront of the discipline
• Combine database theory, research and practice at the forefront of the discipline and use it
to guide the design and implementation of robust data-centric solutions
• Demonstrate competency in using data-centric approaches to assess and analyse data sets
to generate insights
• Communicate solutions and insights to technical and non-technical audiences
MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence: Introduction to Programming and Data Management
Assignment Brief:
In this assignment, you are required to design and implement a relational database using MySQL or
Python (SQLite). Your relational database should be designed to store
and manage data for the project topic that you selected in week2 (you should design the database of your
own. Ensure that you inform the module leader if you decide to change your topic). The steps that you
should follow for this assignment are presented below:
1. Undertake database planning and requirement gathering steps. These will consist of defining the
mission statement, mission objectives and any assumptions that you make before the conceptual design
of the database.
You can search for similar databases from websites like Kaggle or other websites provided in module
reading and define the requirements of the database that you are going to design (in Kaggle website
various examples are provided) or generate synthetic data (links are provided in module reading). You
can add more attributes and change the values (your database should not be exactly the same as the
databases that you extracted from Kaggle! or the examples in lectures).
You may propose additional features and other functions that could be added and hence should be
taken into consideration when designing your database (marks will be awarded for the quality, novelty,
and originality of your design)
2. Design a relational database and create a logical model represented by an Entity-Relationship Diagram
(ERD). Your design process should progress from conceptual to logical models. You will need to
identify, for example:
a. Entities
b. Attributes & constraints
c. Relations & their cardinality
d. Candidate, primary, foreign & composite keys if there are any
Your database design will need to be in Third/Boyce Normal Form (3NF).
3. Identify the research objectives and enquiries likely to be made of the database by the users. At this
stage, these need only be expressed in bullet points or a table, and not in SQL query languages (you
will have to implement them later in MySQL as explained in Step 7).
4. Implement the relational database using MySQL (in the case of a relational database).
5. Keep records of the construction of your database (screenshots or copy/paste text).
6. Collect then insert data into your database. The data should be representative of what the database will
store in practice and should be substantial enough to demonstrate the functioning of your database and
generate interesting insights. Keep records of your progress on the collection and testing of the data.
7. Create a series of MySQL queries that are representative of those likely to be used by the intended
operators. Keep records of the queries and their results. Report any insights that you generate from
your data.
8. Propose a conceptual, logical and a physical ERD.
MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence: Introduction to Programming and Data Management
9. Write a 3,500-word reflective essay identifying and describing the key decisions made during the
design and implementation of your database(s); this essay will be based on the journal you were
encouraged to keep throughout the build section of the module.
Submission requirements:
1. MySQL scripts of the build, population and testing of your database along with the script to generate
insights from your data.
2. Your database in electronic form (the command to export a database in MySQL is ‘mysqldump’).
3. A reflective essay critically analysing the decisions made during the design and implementation of
your database. The report should have less than 3,500 (excludes appendices and bibliographies)
4. Submit your essay as two files: one Word version and one PDF version. If you write your essay in
Pages or another application, convert it to PDF/Word when you have finished and check that all
diagrams and tables are visible. Submit your scripts and dump file as a single Zip file.
5. The name of the files should match the pattern SXXXXXX.pdf, SXXXXXX.doc(x) and
SXXXXXX.zip where sXXXXXX is your UoS student number. Therefore, your submission should
include three files: the report files in PDF and doc(x) formats as well as the script/dump files
stored in a zip file. Ensure that the report document is also marked with your UoS number (student
ID). Your name should not appear anywhere in the files.
6. Your report should use line spacing of 1.5 and body font size of 12pt.
7. Submit all files into Brightspace together and double-check that all expected files are safely submitted.
Do not zip/compress your files in the same folder before submission as Turnitin will not be able
to check your report for plagiarism.
8. If your submission exceeds the word count by up to 10% then there will be no penalty applied.
Submissions that exceed the word count by more than 10% will be applied a fixed penalty of 5
percentage points (i.e., 5 marks). In all cases, the penalised mark will not be reduced below a pass
level, assuming the work merits a pass. Tables, diagrams (including associated legends), appendices,
reference lists, tables of contents, footnotes, and endnotes are excluded from the word count however
should be used appropriately. It is for the Module Leader to decide if there is an excessive or
inappropriate use of components excluded from the word count.
9. All bibliographies must be formatted according to UoS Harvard style. For more details, see
https://libguides.uos.ac.uk/academic/referencing/Harvard
10. Your submitted report will be checked for plagiarism using Turnitin and any plagiarism detected will
be dealt with seriously according to the University’s policy for plagiarism, so paraphrase and cite your
references carefully.
11. Remember that you can run a similarity report check once before submission by uploading your report
document to the Similarity Report Check folder.
MSc Data Science and Artificial Intelligence: Introduction to Programming and Data Management
Assessment Rubric:
The following rubrics will be used in the marking of your assessment
Max marks Feedback Mark
Relational DB Design (35 marks)
Planning and requirement gathering (mission
statement, mission objectives, assumptions)
5
Conceptual design (entities, relationships) 10
Logical design 10
Physical design 5
Potential enquiries 5
Relational DB Implementation (40 marks)
Database build (tables, collections) 5
Finding appropriate data and populating the
database
10
Queries to test and generate insights from the
database (inclusion of query outputs)
15
Discussing security issues (access control,
encryption, backup, views), performance
optimisation (e.g. EXPLAIN, indexes) and other
considerations (e.g. potential problems, changes
over time)
10
Presentation & Referencing (25 marks)
Presentation quality (spelling, grammar, editing,
structure, quality of writing, accessibility to non-
technical audiences, ease to access and run
scripts)
15
Strength of references and citation format 10
Final Mark 100

